	Title

Georgian: შენ ხარ ვენახი

Latin Transliteration: Shen Khar Venakhi

English Translation: You are a Vineyard




	Rubric

Calendar Date:

Feast Day or Service (some will be liturgy, some feast days): para-liturgical 

Tone (1-8 or none): 6

Genre (choose from 10 options): Troparion



	Text

Georgian Text: შენ ხარ ვენახი, ახლად აყვავებული,
ნორჩი კეთილი, ედემს შინა ნერგული,
ალვა სუნელი, სამოთხეს ამოსული,
ღმერთმან შეგამკო ვერვინა გჯობს ქებული,
და თავით თვისით მზე ხარ და გაბრწყინვებული.

Text Author: King Demetre II

Date of Authorship: 12th century

Notes: This text was dedicated to the Holy Theotokos... ??? (Who is the Holy Theotokos?)

Transliterated Text: Shen khar venakhi, axlad aqvavebuli,
Norchi k’etili, edems shina nerguli,
Alva suneli, samotkhes amosuli,
Ghmertman Shegamk’o vervina gjobs kebuli,
Da davit tvisit mze khar da gabrts’qinvebuli

English Text Translation: You are a vineyard newly blossomed.
Young, beautiful, growing in Eden,
A fragrant poplar sapling in Paradise.
May God adorn you. No one is more worthy of praise.
You yourself are the sun, shining brilliantly.

English Translation Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shen_Khar_Venakhi







	History




The Kakhetian version of this chant has gone through a number of transformations throughout its history. Vasil Karbelashvili transcribed this chant in Eastern Georgia at the turn of the 20th century, yet his chant transcriptions were locked up and inaccessible during the Soviet period.[insert citation footnote: Graham] The composer Zakaria Paliashvili, influenced by the Russian school of composition, arranged the Kakhetian version for six voices (SATTBB) at around the same time. Unlike Karbelashvili's transcription, Paliashvili's arrangement was available during the Soviet period. As such, it seems to have served as the basis for the Rustavi Ensemble's own arrangement, which originated in the 1960s and was once again reduced to three voices (from Paliashvili's six).[insert citation footnote: Graham] 

The Rustavi Ensemble arrangement is perhaps the most well-known chant in mainstream society; it is associated with weddings, celebrations, and important moments in Georgian history. For example, it was performed by the Basiani Ensemble in August, 2009 (??? - wasn't it in 2008?), during the war between Russia and Georgia.[insert citation footnote: Graham]




	Current Role in Liturgy/Culture

Shen Khar Venakhi does not have a place in the liturgy, but is often performed at both secular and religious events, such as weddings and celebrations.




	Variants

		Chant version

Chanter:

Original Transcriber (i.e. Vasil Karbelashvili):

Transmission Type (i.e. oral, transcription, recording):

Transmission Date:

Composer:

Monastery Tradition (three options: Gelati, Shemoxmedi, East Georgia ???):

	Recording(s):

Recording version

Primary Resource (link, audio file, etc.):
Artist:
Album:
Year:
Style:
Permissions (???):




	Transcription(s):

Transcription version

Primary Resource (link, picture, pdf, etc.):
Transcriber (i.e. Nathan Shane):
Citation Data (i.e. Q8-40 in Center of Georgian Manuscripts):
Permissions (???):
Artist source:
Album source:
Notes:




	Traditional Chant Versions

		Version Kakheti

Place of Origin: Kakheti

Source: ??? (Who did Karbelashvili transcribe it from?)

Notes:

Transcription(s): 
1. Vasil Karbelashvili
Transcriber: Vasil Karbelashvili
Notes: Vasil Karbelashvili transcribed this Eastern Georgian chant at the turn of the 20th century.

Recording(s): 
1. Anchiskhati recording (Alazani.ge link)


		Version Guria

Place of Origin: Guria

Source: ??? (Who made the original transcription, and who did they transcribe it from?)

Notes: 

Transcription(s):
1. Anchiskhati Ensemble
Transcriber: 
Source: Album "Church and Feast Hymns" by the Anchiskhati Ensemble

Recording(s):
1. Anchiskhati recording (Alazani.ge link)





	Alternative Chant Versions


		Version Zakaria Paliashvili

Composer: Zakaria Paliashvili
Source: Liturgia

Notes:

Transcription(s):
1. Paliashvili Sheet Music
Transcriber:
Source: 

Recording(s):

		Version Rustavi Ensemble

Composer: 

Source: Rustavi Ensemble Arrangement

Notes:

Transcription(s):
1. Rustavi Ensemble
Transcriber:
Source: Album "Alilo: Ancient Georgian Chorales"

Recording(s):
	




	Page Info

Sources:
Graham, John. "You are the Vineyard, Newly Blossomed": Contemporary Performance Aesthetics in Georgian Orthodox Chant. (??? - finish citation)

Further References:



Contributors: Nathan Shane


