An Idiot’s Guide to Georgian Chant

In case you're not familiar with Georgian chant, here's a short, accessible introduction to the music, its background, who sings it, and all of that chant [strike-through chant] jazz. We assume that you know nothing about the music, so fear not and enjoy your first adventure in chant-land!

What is Georgian chant?

Georgian chant is the liturgical music of Georgian Orthodoxy, the Christian Orthodox religion in the Republic of Georgia. In case you don't know where that is, Georgia is the tiny country east of the Black Sea, bordered by Russia in the North and by Turkey, Armenia and Azerbaijan in the South.

[insert map showing Georgia and surrounding region]

What are the musical characteristics of Georgian chant?

Georgian chant is sung without instruments and has three voice parts. The top part carries the primary melody of the chant, while the middle and bass harmonize with the top part and with each other. Each voice part has melodic integrity, yet the three come together to form a whole. (Notice the religious significance?) The technical term for this kind of music is “polyphonic”. Bach’s music, for instance, is polyphonic, whereas the vast majority of Western pop music, with its melodies and chordal accompaniments, is not. Besides its polyphonic characteristics, Georgian chant has a unique harmonic language, featuring harmonies like stacked fifths (C-G-D, for example, from bottom to top). The traditional style of singing further differentiates Georgian chant from other choral traditions around the world. There is little improvisation nowadays, as the music is read from volumes of chant transcriptions throughout Georgia; however, a few experienced chanters are capable of improvisation.

What in the world did all that mean? I just want to know what it sounds like!

Great, then find out for yourself!

[insert recordings]

What is the history of Georgian chant?

Christianity arrived in Georgia in 337, and there is evidence of chant from over 1000 years ago. Chants were likely a mix of Greek orthodox melodies and indigenous Georgian hymns. Arguably the most distinct characteristic of Georgian chant, its three-part polyphony, goes back to the 12th century at least. Georgian chant was an oral tradition (i.e. no notation) for the majority of its history. Aspiring chanters would apprentice themselves to so-called “Master Chanters” for a few years, memorizing hundreds of chant melodies and learning skills like the spontaneous improvisation of middle and bass parts according to a top melody. In this way, they would absorb the oral tradition and then pass it on to the next generation of singers years later.
Beginning around 1800, the Georgian Orthodox religion was suppressed and persecuted for almost 200 years, first under the Tsarist Russian empire, and then under the Soviet Union. Under these conditions, the oral tradition of chant began to crumble in the 19th century. Luckily, many chants were transcribed before they disappeared, allowing church musicians to revive the music in the late 1980s. Due to the many years in which chant was banned in Georgia, today's knowledge of the original, traditional style of performance is limited to a handful of old recordings.

[link to old recordings page]

What is the role of Georgian chant in the Georgian Orthodox religion?

The purpose of chant is to praise God, both in Georgian Orthodoxy and in other Orthodox traditions. In Georgian Orthodoxy, each chant has a specific role in the liturgy. For example, the chant Jvarsa Shensa is sung once a year during the September 14th church holiday, whereas Khortsi K'rist'esi is performed during Communion at the weekly Sunday morning service.

What is the difference between Georgian chant and Georgian folk music?

Georgian folk music is the secular counterpart of Georgian chant; together, they form the traditional music of Georgia. While chant texts are all religious in nature, folk songs address a variety of subjects, including work, war, love and the greatness of Georgia. Like in chant, folk songs (from most regions) contain three vocal parts, and the voice is the primary instrument; however, other instruments are not uncommon in folk music. The voice parts in folk songs are often simpler and more repetitive (although there are significant exceptions to this point). To the untrained ear, folk music might appear more varied: multi-section folk songs, yodeling, and sections in which two choirs trade riffs and get steadily faster are all part of the folk tradition.

 [insert examples of folk songs]

If you are interested in learning about Georgian folk music, feel free to consult one of the following websites:

[insert links]

What are the primary regions of Georgia, and how does the regional origin of chant influence its musical characteristics?

Georgia is a mountainous country, with the Greater Caucasus range in the North, the Lesser Caucasus range in the South, and the smaller Likhi range that runs perpendicular to the first two in the center of Georgia. This third range geographically divides the country into West and East, a division that had numerous consequences during the country's history. As a result, there are significant musical differences between those chants transcribed in the West and those in the East. There are also distinctions to be made between chants transcribed at monastic centers within the same region, although the greatest contrast comes from the West-East divide.

[insert examples of chants from West and East]

Who composed these chants?

Traditional chants rose out of the oral tradition, so there are no "composers" as in the Western classical tradition. However, the style of a master chanter was inevitably a combination of the oral tradition he inherited and his own musical idiosyncrasies. Thus, the chant transcriptions we have today only provide snapshots of the original oral tradition, rather than a complete portrait.

Who sings Georgian chant?

There are numerous church choirs throughout the country who chant during Orthodox services. In addition,  professional singing groups perform chants as part of their concert repertoire, such as the Anchiskhati Ensemble, Sakhioba Ensemble, and Rustavi Ensemble. Choirs throughout Georgia can be male, female, or mixed.  Finally, there is a small but growing community of singers who sing Georgian chant and other Georgian music outside of Georgia.

Are there different singing techniques in Georgian chant today?

There are two main styles of Georgian chant sung today: the choral style and the neo-traditionalist style. The choral style is characterized by a refined, light sound and slow tempos, while the neo-traditionalist style is nasal, piercing, and is typically sung at a natural tempo for singing and understanding the text.

These two styles reflect the modern history of Georgian chant itself. During the Soviet period, certain chants were sung at concerts and other secular events. The chants were typically performed in a manner similar to Russian or European choral music: thus, the refined, choral sound. As the Soviet period came to a close, however, a "neo-traditionalist" style emerged, which based its aesthetic on the style of singing employed by master chanters in old recordings, and tried to distance themselves from the influence of foreign musical traditions.

Both of these styles are alive and well today, and there is considerable contention between the advocates of these two traditions.

Is Georgian chant related to Gregorian chant?

It is possible that the two had the same origin over a thousand years ago, but that is just speculation. Today, they are separate traditions with distinct musical characteristics that just happen to have similar names.

How do I learn more?

Well, you have a few options. First, you can continue to explore this site, where you can read about chants, listen to recordings, and check out sheet music. Second, you can check out the references section for more in-depth investigations into the nature of chant. Third—and perhaps best of all—you can download some sheet music, grab a couple of friends, and start singing! The music is typically transcribed in standard Western notation, so while the music and text might be difficult, it is at the very least accessible to anyone who can read Western music. If you can't read music, then take a hint from the oral-tradition masters of old and learn a chant by ear. Finally, if you get really excited, check out our Tours page for exciting trips to Georgia.